---
title: Hypercompact
permalink: Hypercompact
---

(from {% cite Perlmutter2010 %})

*Hypercompactness* is a large cardinal property that is a strengthening of [supercompactness](Supercompact "Supercompact"). It was defined by Apter in {% cite Apter2012 %}, but with a mistake. Perlmutter called that form excessive hypercompactness.

Definition:
-   A cardinal $\\kappa$ is *$\\alpha$-hypercompact* if and only if for every ordinal $\\beta < \\alpha$ and for every cardinal $\\lambda\\geq\\kappa$, there exists a cardinal $\\lambda'\\geq\\lambda$ and an elementary embedding $j:V\\to M$ generated by a [normal fine ultrafilter](Filter "Filter") on $P\_\\kappa\\lambda$ such that $\\kappa$ is $\\beta$-hypercompact in $M$.
-   $\\kappa$ is *hypercompact* if and only if it is $\\beta$-hypercompact for every ordinal $\\beta$.

Every cardinal is 0-hypercompact, and 1-hypercompactness is equivalent to supercompactness.

If the cardinal $δ$ is Woodin for supercompactness (i.e. [Vopěnka](Vopenka "Vopenka")), then in the model $V\_δ$, there is a proper class of hypercompact cardinals.

The relationship between [extendible](Extendible "Extendible"), hypercompact and [enhanced supercompact](Supercompact#Enhanced_supercompact_cardinals "Supercompact#Enhanced supercompact cardinals") cardinals is not known.

## Excessive hypercompactness
Definition:
-   A cardinal $κ$ is *excessively $0$-hypercompact* iff $κ$ is supercompact.
-   For $α > 0$, a cardinal $κ$ is *excessively $α$-hypercompact* iff for any cardinal $δ ≥ κ$, there is an elementary embedding $j : V → M$ witnessing the $δ$-supercompactness of $κ$ (i.e. $crit(j) = κ$, $j(κ) > δ$ and $M^δ ⊆ M$) generated by a supercompact ultrafilter over $P\_κ (δ)$ such that $M \\models$ “$κ$ is excessively $β$-hypercompact for every $β < α$”.
-   A cardinal κ is *excessively hypercompact* iff $κ$ is excessively $α$-hypercompact for every ordinal $α$.

The key difference between the definitions of hypercompact and excessively hypercompact is that in the definition of hypercompact, the embedding $j$ need not be witnessed by a normal fine measure on $P\_κλ$, but can be witnessed instead by a larger supercompactness measure. (Besides, Perlmutter changed the handling of limit stages.)

There are no excessively hypercompact cardinals. In particular, there is no cardinal $κ$ such that $κ$ is excessively $(2^κ)^+$-hypercompact.

On the other hand, the $β$-hypercompactness and excessive $β$-hypercompactness hierarchies align below $κ^+$ (this alignment is off by one because of the handling of limit stages):
: For a cardinal $κ$ and an ordinal $β ≤ κ^+$, if $κ$ is $β$-hypercompact, then for every ordinal $α < β$ and for every cardinal $λ ≥ κ$, there is an elementary embedding $j : V → M$ generated by a normal fine measure on $P\_κ λ$ such that $κ$ is $α$-hypercompact in $M$.

{{References}}

{{stub}}
